
# Chapter 3: Working with Files and Directories

We have files a directories. What can we do with them?

The obvious is to open a file, e.g. open a JPEG with photo viewer app. But there is so much more!

First, let's use a file large enough that will not fit in the terminal's screen.

🎥 open the [video](), and exectute the commands below

`ls /var/log/dmesg` . If the file exists, its name is printed. If not, an error is printed.

`cat /var/log/dmesg` will print the whole file contents to the screen. Because the file is too long, we miss the first part. Use `less /var/log/dmesg` and press `space bar` to move pages.

To see the first N (default 10) lines: `head /var/log/dmesg`
or the last lines: `tail /var/log/dmesg`

### 💻 Excercise -- create a directory

make sure you are in your home directory: `cd ~` . The `~` is a special sign for the terminal program meaning "current user' home directory". 

Create a new directory: `mkdir chap3`  . As you correctly guessed, mkdir == Make Directory.

Create a new empty file in it: `touch chap3/barbara`
Create another directory inside: `mkdir chap3/insider`
Create a file there: `touch chap3/insider/tuchman`

ℹ️ There are a few special characters to help navigating:<br>
<pre>
~     home directory
.     current directory
..    one directory up
</pre>

At last, copy the contents of *chap3* to the current directory: `cp chap3/* .`

✅ Find how to copy ALL the contents of the directory.


# The `find` tool
This is a very capable tool to find file/dirs according to many criteria. It can be simple as "find all file with extension txt in the current dir (and sub directories)" ,to *"find (starting from root) all files (but not dirs) that are at most 3 weeks old, and their size is at least 50KB. When found, search for the string "log". if the string is found, print the file name"*

The easy ones, we can remember: `find -name "*.txt"` 

for the more complex tasks, I shamelessly use GPT:<br>
`find / -type f -mtime -21 -size +50k -exec grep -l "log" {} +`

This command has tons of options. Part of its strenght is that once a file/dir is found, some operations on it can be executed (search within it in this example), and the operation can be any linux command!

# locate a command
When we type a command (for example `date`), the shell looks for a file with that name (* minor lie here) and if found, execute it.<br>
How can we find where is the vast dir tree is this command?

Use `which date`. 
In Alpine it tells us there is a file at `/bin/date` <br>
In Ubuntu , the location is `/usr/bin/date`<br>

✅ Try it!


# File Types
What is the file type of "my_selfie.jpg" ? If running in Windows, The program in which you see the file name (called File Explorer, but who cares), will simply look at the extension jpg, check its list of installed applications, run the matching program (if found) and hand it this file. 

In windows, nobody cares what is inside the file. If the extension is JPG, in surely is a JPEG image!

In linux, its is a different: the file type is deduced by opening it, reading some data (until we have enough to have a decision) and then we know for sure what is the correct file type.

✅ create a file with some text in it: `echo "I love shell" > selfie.jpg`
Then run `file selfie.jpg` and see what it says.

⚠️ the `file` command is not installed in Alpine (this is why is is so lightweight...)


### 💻 Execrcise - how many lines in that file?

run `wc --help`.

How many lines are in `/var/log/dmesg`? <br>
What is its file type?