# Chapter 5: Basic Linux Commands

In this chapter we will cover a few command which are helpful to get along in the shell.

# System information commands

`whoami` – Tells you your username (i.e., who is logged in).

`hostname` – Shows the name of the computer (helpful if you're connected to a remote system).

`date` – Displays the current date and time according to the system.

### 💻 Excercise
Print the current date in YYYY-MM-DD format

`uptime` – Tells you how long the system has been running since its last reboot, and how busy it is. Give it parameters to return the needed output.

# Process Management

Every command you run is a process. These commands help you see and manage them.

`ps` – Shows running processes (programs). Use `ps aux` to see all processes.

`kill` – Sends a signal to a process, usually to stop (terminate) it. You need the process ID (PID), which you can get from `ps`

A process can run in the *forground* or *background*

`jobs` – Lists your current jobs (programs started from this terminal). Useful when working with background tasks.

A process can be suspended - it is in comma until we kill it or revive it.

`Ctrl+z` – Pause the current command and send it to the background in *stopped* state. You can resume it with `fg` or `bg`.

`bg` – Resumes a paused job (usually with Ctrl+Z) and runs it in the background.

`fg` – Brings a background job back to the foreground so you can interact with it.

`Ctrl+cC` – Cancel the current command. If a program is running and you want to stop it, press this.

### 💻 Excercise -- using ps and jobs

In this exercise, you will run a program, suspend it, send it the background and more.

Create the program: `echo 'for ((i=1; ; i++)); do echo  "$i" ; sleep 1; done' > loop`


make `loop` file executable: `chmod +x loop`

run it: `./loop`

Kill it by pressing `ctrl-c`

Run it again, this time suspend it.
``` shell
$ ./loop
hello
hello
hello
^Z
[1]+  Stopped                 ./loop
cnoam@noam-u:~/tmp$
```
check who is suspended: `jobs`

Resume it to run in the background. Because the program writes to stdout, it will disturb the prompt (`$`)but you can give other commands in the shell since the program runs in the background!

You cannot kill or suspend it again now using `ctrl-c` / `ctrl-z` since it is not connected to the shell.

type `fg` (don`t forget ENTER) and the program will now be in the forground, using the shell's stdin.(so pressing keys will affect it)

Kill it using `ctrl-c`

!!TODO!!

🎥 watch the [video]() where I run this example


# Keyboard shortcuts
Don't work too hard — nobody wants to type everything from scratch.

**↑ (Up arrow)**: Shows the previous command. You can press it multiple times to scroll through your command history. Once you find what you want, you can edit it or just press `ENTER` to run it again.


**`TAB`**: After typing the first few characters of a command or file name, press `TAB` to auto-complete it. If there's more than one match, pressing `TAB` again may show you the options.


**`ctrl-r`** : reverse search. type ctrl-r and start typing part of a previous command. The shell will search your history and show matches as you type. Press `Ctrl+r` again to cycle through other matches. Press `ENTER` to run the found command, or use arrow keys to edit it.


There are many more tricks for using the shell, but let's start with these three.
